Stadium size, ticket allotments, and home field advantage in college football
Steven B. Caudill, Franklin G. Mixon Jr.
Department of Economics, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA
Department of Economics, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS, USA

Abstract
This study builds on a conceptual framework that explores of the relationship between relative fan
attendance, stadium size, and home field advantage in college football. We extend the conceptual model by
providing empirical estimates of the impact that various ticket allotment arrangements and home stadium
size have on the probability of winning in college football. The Auburn–Alabama rivalry (the “Iron Bowl”)
provides a unique case given that the series has been played both at a neutral site with an equal division of
tickets, as well as on a home-and-home basis with an uneven ticket split and nonuniform stadium capacities.
Introduction
The academic literature investigating the importance of a college football program's success has grown
considerably over the past 25 years. Caudill and Mixon (1996) point out that the benefits to a university's
athletic department from college football success include greater gate receipts and the successful recruiting of
“blue chip” high school football players that ensures the winning continues. Langelett (2003) provides
empirical support for the latter of these two benefits. With regard to academic benefits, recent research has
been mixed. Tucker (2004) confirms the earlier view (Brooker & Klastorin, 1981; McCormick & Tinsley, 1990)
that college football success increases a university's alumni giving rate and its overall graduation rate. Other
work indicates that college football success also has a positive impact on an institution's freshman retention
rate (Mixon & Treviño, 2005) and, through an advertising effect, the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores of
incoming freshmen (Mixon, Treviño, & Minto, 2004; Tucker, 2005). However, Tucker and Amato (2006) offer
contradictory results for basketball success and SAT scores, while Frank (2004) presents a survey of
contradictory evidence for other links between athletic success and academic success.
The Caudill and Mixon (1996) study examines the relationship between ticket allotment rules and the
probability of winning in college football. That study provides a conceptual framework, built around the
annual Alabama–Auburn football rivalry (i.e., the “Iron Bowl”), that employs statistical and graphical
explorations of the relationship between relative fan attendance and the probability of winning. This study
employs and extends that conceptual model by providing empirical estimates of the impact that various ticket
allotment arrangements have, through the home field advantage, on the probability of winning in college
football. As such, the results presented in this study have implications about the impact of fan-specific factors
on home field advantage and the probability of winning. For example, fans who attend athletics events not
only get to enjoy consumption benefits that come from watching; they also get to assist their team by
exhorting them on and, in some sports, making it difficult for opposing teams to communicate on the playing
field and influencing the decisions of those individuals who are officiating (Boyko et al., 2007). In this way, fan
participation increases the home team's probability of winning, which in turn increases the consumption
benefits accruing to the fans themselves. Given these implications, a team interested in maximizing the
probability of winning would want to make the cost of home (visiting) fan attendance low (high). In some
sports, where venue capacity is not a problem (e.g., women's college basketball), this is accomplished by
giving tickets (i.e., $0 admission) to home fans. Where venue capacity is more of a constraint (e.g., college
football), this is generally accomplished through stadium expansion(s). These considerations make the
Auburn–Alabama rivalry an interesting case study given that the series has been played both at neutral sites
with an equal division of tickets, as well as on a home-and-home basis with an uneven ticket split and
nonuniform stadium capacities.

Historical background: a brief review
The Alabama–Auburn series is one of college football's most heated rivalries, dating back to 1893. After the
renewal of the series in 1948, following a hiatus from 1908 to 1947, the game was played at a “neutral site” –
Birmingham's Legion Field – and tickets to the game there were historically split equally between the two
opposing institutions (Caudill & Mixon, 1996). …
New statistical analysis
Viewed in a production framework, the probability of winning depends on relative talent levels, relative
injuries, relative coaching ability, and relative fan attendance, among other factors. Caudill and Mixon's (1996)
conceptual framework assumes that everything but fan attendance is equal for both teams in order to focus
on the statistical effects of moving the Iron Bowl series to a home-and-home arrangement. In doing so, they
express the probability of an Alabama victory (in a given game in …

Extending the analysis for future research
Table 4 presents stadium information for all 12 teams in the Southeastern Conference (SEC). Given the SEC's
ticket allotment agreement of 9500 tickets for visiting teams, each team's home field advantage (HFA) is given
by HFA = [ln(SC - 9500)/9500)] * 0.0981 where SC is equal to the stadium capacity for each team. As indicated
above, teams with larger stadium capacities will have disproportionate home field advantages in conference
games.